.\" $Id$
.TH SUDOERS 5
.SH NAME
sudoers \- list of which users may execute what as root
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I sudoers
file is composed of an optional host alias section, an optional command
alias section and the user specification section. All command or host
aliases need to start with their respective keywords
(ie: Host_Alias, User_Alias, or Cmnd_Alias).
If there are multiple occurrences of a user, the union of the entries
will be used.
.nf

user specification format: 
  user access_group [: access_group] ...

    access_group ::= host_type = [op]cmnd_type [,[op]cmnd_type] ... 
       host_type ::= a lower\-case hostname, netgroup, ip address,
		           network number, or host alias.
       cmnd_type ::= an command OR a command alias.
              op ::= the logical '!' NOT operator.

host alias section format:
  Host_Alias HOSTALIAS = host\-list

      Host_Alias ::= a keyword.
       HOSTALIAS ::= an upper\-case alias name.
       host\-list ::= a comma separated list of hosts, netgroups,
			      ip addresses, networks.

user alias section format:
  User_Alias USERALIAS = user\-list

      User_Alias ::= a keyword.
       USERALIAS ::= an upper\-case alias name.
       user\-list ::= a comma separated list of users and netgroups.

command alias section format:
  Cmnd_Alias CMNDALIAS = cmnd\-list

      Cmnd_Alias ::= a keyword.
       CMNDALIAS ::= an upper\-case alias name.
       cmnd\-list ::= a comma separated list commands.

Text after a pound sign '#' is considered a comment.
Words that begin with a plus sign '+' are assumed to
be netgroups
Long lines can be newline escaped with the backslash '\\' character.
The reserved alias 'ALL' can be used for both {Host,User,Cmnd}_Alias'.

    DO NOT define an alias of 'ALL', it will NOT be used.
    Note that 'ALL' implies the entire universe of hosts/users/commands.
    You can subtract elements from the universe by using the syntax:
       user  host=ALL,!ALIAS1,!/etc/halt...
    Note that the '!' notation only works in a user's command list.  You
    may not use it to subtract elements in a User_Alias, Host_Alias, or
    Cmnd_Alias.
.fi
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
    # Host alias specification
    Host_Alias  HUB=houdini:\\
                REMOTE=merlin,kodiakthorn,spirit
    Host_Alias  SERVERS=houdini,merlin,kodiakthorn,spirit
    Host_Alias  CSNETS=128.138.243.0,128.138.204.0,\\
                       128.138.205.192

    # User alias specification
    User_Alias  FULLTIME=millert,dowdy,mikef
    User_Alias  PARTTIME=juola,mccreary,tor

    # Command alias specification
    Cmnd_Alias  LPCS=/usr/etc/lpc,/usr/ucb/lprm
    Cmnd_Alias  SHELLS=/bin/sh,/bin/csh,/bin/tcsh,/bin/ksh
    Cmnd_Alias  SU=/bin/su
    Cmnd_Alias  MISC=/bin/rm,/bin/cat:\\
                SHUTDOWN=/etc/halt,/etc/shutdown

    # User specification
    FULLTIME    ALL=ALL
    PARTTIME    ALL=ALL,!SHELLS,!SU
    +interns    +openlabs=ALL,!SHELLS,!SU
    britt       REMOTE=SHUTDOWN:ALL=LPCS
    nieusma     SERVERS=SHUTDOWN,/etc/reboot:\\
                HUB=ALL,!SHELLS
    jill        houdini=/etc/shutdown,MISC
    markm       HUB=ALL,!MISC,!/etc/shutdown,!/etc/halt
    davehieb    merlin=ALL:SERVERS=/etc/halt:\\
                kodiakthorn=ALL
    steve       CSNETS=/usr/su_commands/
.fi
.sp
The above
.I sudoers
file specification is composed of 4 host alias specifications, 2 user alias
specifications, 4 command alias specifications and 8 user specifications.  Full
time staff (those in the FULLTIME alias) are allowed to execute any command on
any host.  Part time staff (those in the PARTTIME alias) are allowed to execute
any command except for the group of SHELL and SU commands on any machine.
Britt is permitted to execute /etc/halt, /etc/shutdown, /usr/etc/lpc and
/usr/ucb/lprm on the REMOTE machines (merlin, kodiakthorn, and spirit).
Nieusma is allowed to run /etc/halt, /etc/shutdown, and /etc/halt on all
machines and all commands except for the group of SHELL commands on the HUB
machines.  Jill is permitted to execute /etc/shutdown, /bin/rm, and /bin/cat
on houdini.  Davehieb can execute any command on machines merlin and kodiakthorn
and can halt the SERVERS.  Any user in the netgroup "interns" may run any
command on the machines in the netgroup "openlabs" except for those commands
in the groups SHELL and SU.  Steve can run any command located in the
directory /usr/su_commands on all machines on the subnets listed in CSNETS
(note that the 128.138.192 net has a netmask of 255.255.255.192 which is
why its network number is 128.138.192.192.
.sp
.B sudo
will do a logical and of a machine's ip address(es) with its netmask to decide
whether that machine is on a given network).
.sp
The
.I sudoers
file should 
.B always
be edited by the 
.B visudo 
command which locks the file and does grammatical checking. It is
imperative that the
.I sudoers
be free of syntax errors since sudo will not run with a syntactically
incorrect sudoers file.
.SH FILES
.nf
/etc/sudoers                 file of authorized users.
/etc/netgroup                list of network groups
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR sudo (8),
.BR visudo (8),
.BR su (1)
