.TH VISUDO 8
.SH NAME
visudo \- edit the sudoers file

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B visudo
[-V]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.I visudo
edits the
.I sudoers
file in a safe fashion, analogous to
.BR vipw (8).
.I visudo
locks the
.I sudoers
file against multiple simultaneous edits, provides basic sanity checks,
and guards against parse errors.  If the
.I sudoers
file is currently being edited you will receive a message to try
again later.  In the default configuration, the
.BR vi (1)
editor is used, but there is a compile time option to allow use
of whatever editor the environmental variables EDITOR or VISUAL are
set to.
.sp
.I visudo
parses the
.I sudoers
file after the edit and will not save the changes if there is a
syntax error.  Upon finding an error, a message will be printed
stating the line number(s) that the error occurred on
and the user will receive the "What now?" prompt.  At this point
the user may enter "e" to re-edit the
.I sudoers
file, enter "x" to exit without saving the changes, or "q" to quit
and save changes.  The "q" option should be used with extreme care
because if
.I visudo
believes there to be a parse error, so will
.I sudo
and no one will be able to execute sudo again until the error is
fixed.  Any other command at this prompt will print a short help message.
When editing the
.I sudoers
file after a parse error has been detected the cursor will be placed on the
line where the error occurred (if the editor supports this feature).

.SH OPTIONS
.I visudo
accepts the following command line option:
.IP -V
The -V (version) option causes visudo to print the version number
and exit.

.SH FILES
.nf
/etc/sudoers                 file of authorized users.
/etc/stmp                    lock file for visudo.
.fi

.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
The following are used only if
.I visudo
was compiled with the ENV_EDITOR option:
.nf

EDITOR                       Used by visudo as the editor to use.
VISUAL                       Used by visudo if EDITOR is not set.
.fi

.SH AUTHOR
Many people have worked on
.I sudo
over the years, this version of
.I visudo
was written by:
.nf

Todd Miller                   <Todd.Miller@cs.colorado.edu>

See the HISTORY file in the sudo distribution for more details.
.fi

Please send all bugs, comments, and changes to sudo-bugs@cs.colorado.edu.

.SH DISCLAIMER
This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc.,
675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

.SH CAVEATS
There is no easy way to prevent a user from gaining a root shell if 
the editor used by visudo allows shell escapes.

.SH BUGS
The
.I -V
flag gives the version of the
.I sudo
package rather than the individual
.I visudo
program.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR sudo (8),
.BR vipw (8)
